+++
author = "Justin Cormack"
date = "2020-01-26T13:30:00Z"
description = "WTFosdem"
tags = []
title = "WTFosdem"
+++

Next weekend is [Fosdem](https://fosdem.org), the largest open source event in
Europe. A lot of people will no doubt be coming for the first time, or thinking
about coming another year, so I thought it might be helpful to explain what it
is. Fosdem is not really like any other event, so Americans in particular find
it confusing, thinking it might be like OSCON or something. It is not. Of US
events I know, it is perhaps most like All Things Open, but it really is a
different thing. My qualifications for writing this are that I have been on and
off since about 2004. I worked there a few years, back when Greenpeace ran the
conference WiFi, before Cisco took over, and I have spoken once.

The first practicality is you notice you don't have to register, or indeed pay.
You should however donate (on site) if you can afford it, although they will
try to give you a really ugly t-shirt if you do. Most people do not donate, so
the conference relies on volunteers, the Université libre de Bruxelles which
gives the space, and, increasingly, corporate sponsors. The next practicality
is where to stay. The location is not very central, and while there is a tram
link it can get extraordinarily full. The best plan is to either stay within
walking distance, or to stay near the start of the tram line, which is near St
Catherine in the centre of Brussels. You can also use taxi/Uber but the sheer
number of people trying to get to and from the location can mean delays.
Brussels is one of my favourite cities in Europe, and along with my friends who
live there, one of the reasons I usually decide to attend. I highly recommend
you spend some time visiting the city. It is February though, so bring hat,
gloves and warm clothes. Some years it has been snowy and the hills get
slippery so be careful walking around, and allow extra time.

<img src="/brusselssnow.jpg" alt="Brussels snow" style="width:80%"/>

The next practicality is that this conference is overwhelmingly attended by
white men. Most tracks will not have any women speakers. We know tech has a
diversity problem, but it is really in your face here more than other places.
Since 2016 there has at least been a [code of
conduct](https://fosdem.org/2020/practical/conduct/) after [Sarah Mei wrote
about it in
2015](http://www.sarahmei.com/blog/2015/02/01/the-fosdem-conundrum/). Richard
Stallman attended as recently as 2016. Sarah's piece says it "feels like 2007",
and this is changing very slowly.

<img src="/fosdem.jpg" alt="Fosdem attendees" style="width:80%"/>

Fosdem started as a developer meetup place, where distributed communities would
meet to hack on things, and talk about what they have done. So everything is
divided by project like grouping. There are a large number of rooms for talks,
but not enough for all the diversity of modern open source, so some years
projects like Perl that always used to have Fosdem community meetings don't get
a room, and things get grouped where they used to be split, like "small
languages" or "desktop". From an audience point of view thats better, and the
community meetings do tend to happen, in the hacking rooms, over meals and so
on. The traditional thing to do is sit in one room all day, but of course lots
of people are interested in learning about new things and want to wander
around. And some things are massively popular and in smallish rooms (most rooms
are smallish), such as the Go room in recent years.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">So did fosdem decide
to give away deodorant yet, or is it still the same ol thing</p>&mdash; Jessie
Frazelle (@jessfraz) <a
href="https://twitter.com/jessfraz/status/960177403904647168?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw
">February 4, 2018</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

So the talk you want to go to might well be full. Full means full, if the sign
is on the door it means you won't get in. Remember all the talks are recorded
and streamed, with AV team is pretty amazing. Years ago only some of the rooms
were recorded, but now you won't miss them. So have a backup plan. I remember a
particularly enjoyable we can't get into the Go devroom meeting with Jaana and
others one year. Overall my strategy is generally to go to a few things at
random that might be interesting, maybe target a few specific ones that I
really want to go to (and go early maybe for the previoustalk) but not regret
if I can't get in, and spend most of the time talking to people. The random
things can be great, that is how I started working on NetBSD and rump kernels,
after going to a talk pretty much because I thought a talk about testing
kernels might be interesting. You never know what paths you might go down in
future.

Note there is a growing [Fringe](https://fosdem.org/2020/fringe/) of events
around Fosdem, both before, after and during. No dount, like with the Edinburgh
Festical, the Fringe will soon dwarf the original event.

The whole event is really hectic, and there are going tobe maybe 6,000 people
there, maybe it is more. This gets overwhelming, so take time out for yourself.
I am only planning to attend on Saturday this year, and just to chill out in
Brussels on Sunday.

<img src="/bigtech.jpg" alt="Posters from Fosdem" style="width:80%"/>

Fosdem has a strong culture of open source as freedom and as a political
statement, and there is widespread antipathy to corporate open source. For a
long time there was no real sign of the larger tech companies, but this has
changed in recent years, with Google and AWS sponsoring this year as is the
CNCF, and visible presence of more corporate and industry rather than
grassroots open source. You will meet people who don't like this, don't like
permissive licenses, and might object to your company's open source policies.
In many ways this feels kind of refreshing

Food is very important. Talks run all day, so you need to plan some time for
lunch. The quickest thing is the baguettes that are available at various
places, eg downstairs back of Jansson. They are very efficient about dispensing
these fast. There isn't much choice. There are food trucks out front, with huge
queues at lunchtime. I usually go down the road to Le Pain Quotidian (eat in or
take away) in the small cluster of shops down the road. That is busy but less
so. There is really not much else around this area.

Coffee is important too. There is a GitHub sponsored coffee stall that is good,
but it is free so the queue tends to be very long. The next best coffee is at
the cafeteria. Le Pain Quotidian does coffee too. If you want tea, on Saturday
this year OpenUK are serving tea and biscuits and Brexit commiseration on their
stand.

Beer is a fixture at Fosdem. Belgium makes some of the finest beers in the
world, and some ok ones too. Beers are sold at several points in the venue, and
it is common to take them to talks and so on. Beware most Belgian beers are
strong. Also the kriek they sell at the venue is terrible, even though Belgium
makes some amazing examples of this beer style. There is a pre-conference "beer
event" on Friday, I haven't even tried to go for many years, even though they
take over an entire street it is too crowded to be enjoyable or find anyone you
want to talk to. Yes, there are a lot of alcohol focused events, and events in
bars which could be offputting if you don't drink.

<img src="/etoilevert.jpg" alt="Antique shop" style="width:80%"/>

Brussels is a lovely city. The architecture is beautiful, both the old as
exemplified by Grand Place which is magical in the evening, and the art deco
gems, such as the Musical Instrument Museum, once a shop, and the diversity
everywhere. It is said that there is a rule about not copying buildings,
although I am not sure this is really the cause, but Belgium does not have
terraces of identical houses, but every building is totally different. The
Belgians are also as eccentric as the British, if not more so. Also don't miss
the Galaries Royal St Hubert, the first glazed shopping street in Europe, from
1847.

Perhaps my favourite area are the parts between Sablon, which has a grand
antique market and excellent chocolate shops, and the Marché aux Puces, the
flea market which is full of junk. In between are several streets lagely filled
with antique shops, selling midcentury furniture, and well everything. Some are
huge inside full of things and stuff of every kind just jumbled up anyhow.
There are often amazing window displays like the one below.

<img src="/scissors.jpg" alt="window display" style="width:50%"/>

Food in Brussels is really good, although Fosdem is not always the best time to
eat as you are often with indeterminate amounts of people and getting
reservations, which are often needed on Friday and Saturday nights, is hard.
Also most places are small. Brussels is very international, and all kinds of
food are available there. While most people just think that Belgian food is
frites with mayonnaise and waffles, but there is both French and Flemish food
that are traditional, and great seafood, not just mussels. The local beer is
lambic beer, the sourdough of beer styles made with wild yeast that is only
made in the region. Cantillon is one of the best, and has an amazing museum in
the working brewery in Brussels. This styleof beer is sour, but it is
absolutely delicious. If you love this style, Moeder Lambic is a great place to
try it. There have been a number of new breweries open recently, de la Senne is
excellent and available in good bars.

This year, the Friday night before Fosdem is Brexit. Brussels has a large UK
community, and Fosdem always has a large UK contingent, with whole Eurostar
trains being filled on Friday evening usually. So be nice to any of us you see.

So, yeah, that is Fosdem. Unique. Could be better. Enjoy Brussels.

<img src="/market.jpg" alt="Brussels market" style="width:80%"/>
